JUDY WOODRUFF: This final day
of the Supreme Court term has
revived a controversial item
on President Trump's
agenda: his travel ban.
The justices announced that
they will hear arguments this
fall on the constitutionality
of the ban.
In the meantime, they reinstated
a limited version of the
order, affecting travelers
from six mostly-Muslim
countries.
Mr. Trump lauded the Supreme
Court's action today as --
quote -- "a clear victory for
our national security," adding:
"It allows the travel suspension
for the six terror-prone
countries and the refugee
suspension to become
largely effective."
We explore the legal and
practical implications
now with our regular
Supreme Court watcher
Marcia Coyle of "The National
Law Journal," and Alan Gomez.
He covers immigration
for USA Today.
Welcome to you both.
Marcia, let's start with you.
Let's take this one at a time.
We have got two things that
the court was asked to look at
by the Trump administration,
first to grant review
on hearing the arguments
on the executive order.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National
Law Journal": Right, Judy.
The legal challenges
to the executive order
focused on basically two
provisions, the 90-day
travel ban from six
predominantly Muslim
countries and the 120-day
suspension of the U.S. refugee
assistance program.
The government asks the
Supreme Court to review
two federal appellate
court rulings that struck
down the executive order, one,
and they ruled separately,
claiming that the order violated
the Establishment Clause of
the constitution because it
was religious discrimination.
And a second ground was that
the executive order exceeded
the president's authority under
federal immigration
law, a provision, in
particular, that prohibits
discrimination on the basis
of nationality.
The Supreme Court said it would
hear arguments on the merits
of those two appellate court
rulings in October.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, meantime
and, separately, the justices
were also asked by the Trump
administration to lift the
injunctions that had been
imposed on the travel ban.
What did they say about that?
MARCIA COYLE: Right.
OK, those two federal appellate
courts had approved injunctions
blocking the travel ban
and the suspension of
the refugee program.
The Supreme Court said that the
bans would be lifted only --
would be applied only against
foreign nationals who had
no bona fide relationship
with an individual or
an entity in the United
States.
And the court went on to explain
that in terms of a bona fide
relationship, it should be
a familial relationship with an
individual or, when it comes to
an entity, a formal documented
relationship, for example, a
student has been accepted at a
university in the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, they were
imposing a -- there had to be
some connection already with the
United States.
MARCIA COYLE: Exactly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For
these individuals.
Three justices disagreed
with this partial listing.
What did they say?
MARCIA COYLE: Justice Thomas
wrote for the dissenters and
was joined by Justices Alito
and Gorsuch.
Justice Thomas explained --
he was most in disagreement
about the partial lifting of
the injunctions against
the executive order.
He said it was unworkable,
that it was going to create a
flood gate of litigation as the
government, as government
officials tried to determine
what is a bona fide relationship
with an individual or an entity?
Those three justices would have
kept -- would have allowed the
ban and the executive order
to go into full effect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Alan
Gomez, let me turn to you.
You report, as we said, on
immigration, travel issues.
What is the immediate
effect of this ruling today?
ALAN GOMEZ, USA Today: The
immediate effect is that this
travel ban or what's left of
it can go into effect
as early as Thursday.
But it's important to note that,
once it does into effect, this
is going to look very different
from what we saw back in
January, when President
Trump first signed his
first travel ban on
January 27.
If you remember, at the time,
everybody from these countries
was blocked from entering
the country, so people were
stranded at U.S. airports or
blocked from getting onto their
U.S.-bound flights overseas.
But things have changed
dramatically since then.
His revised travel ban
allows for green card
holders to travel, allows
for people who hold
visas to travel.
And now what the Supreme Court
has ordered, this establishing
this bona fide relationship
that Marcia was explaining a
second ago, that's where we're
going to start trying to figure
out -- that's where
the government is going
to start trying to
figure out who can come
in and who cannot.
And so there's a lot of gray
area and we do expect to see
some litigation about this,
because it's -- it's one thing
if you have a relative in the
U.S. who is trying to claim
you.
That person can come in.
If you have a job offer
from a U.S. employer,
that person can come in.
But what if you're just
businessperson coming over here
to have a couple of meetings on
a short-term visa?
Is that a bona
fide relationship?
If you're a tourist who already
has hotel reservations and
plane reservations, is that
a bona fide relationship?
That's what we're going to
start seeing in those first
couple days when the ban finally
goes into effect.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
that's my question.
Just how clear are
these guidelines that
the justices set down?
Do we assume immigration
officials are scrambling
today to put this in
black and white to figure
it out?
ALAN GOMEZ: There are a lot of
attorneys within the Department
of Justice and Homeland Security
and the State Department
and a lot of immigration
advocacy attorneys who
are just diving into
whatever case law,
whatever precedents they
can find to figure out
what exactly this bona
fide relationship is.
The justices provided
a few examples that we
have cited already, if
you have a job offer,
if you have been admitted
to a U.S. university and if
you have a direct relative.
But beyond that, it's
pretty much wide open now.
So we're trying to figure
out what that means.
To give some context here, in
2016, about 108,000 people came
to the United States legally
from these six countries.
From a quick accounting of
that, the majority of them will
still be allowed to enter the
country under the guidelines
set forth by the Supreme Court,
because most of those were
refugees, had no direct ties
that we're talking about.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
ALAN GOMEZ: But once we get
into some of that other visa
categories that the relationship
is a little bit more tenuous,
that is what has to play out
in the next few weeks, to
see what government determines
to be a bona fide relationship
and whether the courts agree
with them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Very final
quick question, Alan.
The travel ban that was issued
by the president last March was
intended to be temporary while
the government figured
out vetting procedures.
They said it was
going to take 90 days.
Where does that stand?
ALAN GOMEZ: Well, that review
finally started last week.
In a separate ruling, the
Ninth U.S. Circuit Court of
Appeals in San Francisco sort of
separated that vetting review
from this legal case that we're
going through right now and
said that the administration can
start conducting that review.
In short, what they're trying
to do is gauge what kind of
information we get from foreign
governments to screen people
coming into the country.
So they just started
doing that last Monday.
And so, right, the
clock starts now.
They have -- they're going to
review it for 20 days, submit
a list to the president.
Then those governments will have
50 days to get off the list.
And at the conclusion
of that vetting review,
then the president can
decide whether he wants
to impose more or fewer travel
restrictions against different
countries around the country
- - or world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Alan Gomez, USA Today,
Marcia Coyle, thank you both.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Judy.
ALAN GOMEZ: Thank you.